The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Life of Michelangelo

This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Life of Michelangelo

Author: Romain Rolland

Translator: László Éber

Release date: February 3, 2026 [eBook #77857]

Language: Hungarian

Original publication: Budapest: Révai, 1920

Credits: Albert László from page images generously made available by the Hungarian Electronic Library


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LIFE OF MICHELANGELO ***

MASTERPIECES

_From this book, for amateurs, on wood-free paper, French
150 numbered copies were made in half leather binding._

ROMAIN ROLLAND

THE LIFE OF MICHELANGELO

TRANSLATED

LÁSZLÓ EBER

RÉVAI EDITION

Révai Printing House, Budapest.

There is a marble statue in the Museo Nazionale in Florence, which
Michelangelo named him the Victorious. A handsome naked youth, short
with curly hair on his forehead. Standing straight and kneeling, bearded prisoner
He places it on his back, who crouches and stretches his head forward like a bull.
But the winner doesn't look at him. Instead of pushing him down, he stops and turns him away.
sad mouth and hesitant eyes. His arm falls back to his shoulder. He throws it back
himself; he no longer desires victory, he has despised it. He has won. He is defeated.

This is the image of heroic Doubt, this broken-winged Victory, which
Of all Michelangelo's works, it alone remained until the master's death.
in his Florentine workshop and with which Daniele da Volterra, his ideas
his custodian, he wanted to decorate his coffin, – this is Michelangelo himself, this
symbol of his whole life.

* * *

Suffering is endless, it takes on all forms. Where is the reason for things blind?
tyranny: poverty, disease, the injustices of fate,
the evil of people. Where it is rooted in the suffering being itself. In this
case is no less pitiable and no less fatal; for the
Man could not choose his being and neither did he want to live nor did he want to die.
to be, which.

This suffering was Michelangelo's lot. He had the strength to
had the rare good fortune to fight and win
created. He won. – But he didn't want victory. That's not what he wanted. –
The tragedy of Hamlet! A shocking contrast between a heroic genius and a will
between what was not, between commanding passions and a will,
which did not want to!

Let no one expect us to achieve yet another greatness in this, after so many others.
We will never say that because a man is too big,
The world is not enough for him. Restlessness of the soul is not a sign of greatness.
The lack of harmony between being and things, between life and its laws, is still
Even in great people, it is not related to their greatness, but to their weakness. –
Why should we try to hide this weakness? Does it make us less worthy?
Is the one who is weaker worthy of love? - Surely he is much more worthy of it, because he is greater
needs it. I do not erect statues of unapproachable heroes.
I hate cowardly idealism that turns a blind eye to life.
from the miseries and weaknesses of the soul. We must tell that
a people who have an over-sensitivity to the deceptive illusions of sound words
towards: heroic lying is cowardice. There is only one heroism in the world: if
we see the world as it is – and we love it.

* * *

The tragedy of the fate I present here lies in the fact that it is so
It presents a picture of suffering that was born with him, that came from the depths of his being.
which consumes him without a break and will only leave him when
has already destroyed it. One of the most powerful examples of that great
of a human race whose cries of pain and faith are now heard
has been echoing in our West for nineteen centuries: that of Christianity.

Someday, in the future, deep in the centuries, – (if the memory of our land still
survived), – someday the living will rise above the depths of this vanished species
to bow like Dante on the shores of the Malebolge, – wonder, horror and pity
with its compound.

But who will feel it better than us who witnessed it in our childhood?
these worries, – in which we have seen our dearest ones struggling, –
We, whose palates know the bitter and intoxicating taste of Christian pessimism,
its scent, – we who once had to exert ourselves not to
let us, like others, in moments of doubt, allow the Divine Nothingness to
dizziness!

God! Eternal life! Refuge for those who fail to live on this earth!
Faith, which is often not the case, is faith in life, in the future.
faith, lack of faith in ourselves, lack of courage and joy
in the absence of... We know how many defeats your painful victory is built on!...

And that's why I love you, Christians, because I pity you.
I pity you and marvel at your melancholy. You make me sad.
world, but you also make it beautiful. The world will be poorer if you suffer
will no longer be in it. In this age of cowards who tremble at the
in the face of pain and loudly proclaim their right to happiness, which
most of the time it is nothing more than the right to the unhappiness of others, be it
our courage to face pain and honor it! Praise be to
for joy and praise for pain! They are brothers, both are saints.
They forge the world, they nurture great souls. They are the strength, they are
life. He who does not love both loves neither.
the other. And whoever has tasted them knows the value of life and knows,
How sweet to be separated from him.

_Romain Rolland._




The life of Michelangelo




Michelangelo




MICHELANGELO

He was a Florentine citizen, his homeland was Florence, with its gloomy palaces,
with its towers burning like spears, flexible and dry
with its heights, which rise up finely polished against the violet
with their small, black, spindle-shaped cypresses and the swaying olive trees
with its silver ribbon, – Florence, with its sharp elegance, where the pale
The ironic figure of Lorenzo de' Medici and his mockingly turned-up mouth
Machiavelli encountered Botticelli's _Primavera_ and faintly
with her golden-haired, anemic Venuses, – the feverish, proud, nervous Florence,
which has been conquered by every kind of fanaticism, which has been conquered by every religious
and social hysteria shook me, where everyone was free and everyone
tyrant, where it was so good to live and where life was hell, – Florence
city, with its intelligent, impatient, enthusiastic, hateful inhabitants, whose
His tongue was sharp, his spirit suspicious, and those who spied on him envied him,
devoured each other, – the city where there was no room for a free Leonardo
of the spirit of a Scottish Puritan, where Botticelli hallucinated
ended his life in his mysticism, – where he had the face of a goat, his eyes burning
At Savonarola's words, his monks danced around the pyre, which was
consumed artifacts, – and where, three years later, there again
The pyre rose to consume the prophet.

* * *

He was from this city and this era, with all its prejudices,
with their passions and fervor.

It is certain that he was not gentle towards his fellow citizens. Free
His broad-breasted, breathless genius despised their common art,
their mannered wit, their flat realism, their sentimentality, their softened
their meticulousness. He treated them harshly, but he loved them. He was not
in him that smiling indifference towards his country which made Leonardo
Far from Florence, he was consumed by homesickness.[1] Throughout his life
He tried in vain to live there. He stood by Florence
in the tragic hours of the war and wanted "to at least be dead"
to return there if he could not do so in his lifetime."[2]

As a native Florentine, he was proud of his blood and lineage.[3] Prouder
was as much about him as about his art. He did not allow himself to be an artist
consider:

“I am not Michelagniolo, the sculptor… Michelagniolo Buonarroti
I am…[4]

He was of an aristocratic outlook and had all the class prejudices.
He went so far as to say that in his opinion, "art should be for the nobles"
to deal with, not with the plebeians.”[5]

He had a religious, ancient, almost barbaric idea of ​​the family. Everything
sacrificed for him and wanted others to do the same. As
He said he would have “sold himself as a slave” for his family.[6]
Love played little part in this. He despised his brothers, and
deserved. He despised his nephew, - his heir too. But in him, in them
with regard to the representatives of his tribe. That word keeps coming back
in his letters:

“Our nation… _la nostra gente_… to maintain our nation… to
"May our race not die out..."

This tough and strong race had all the superstitions, all the fanaticisms
in it. It was the clay with which his being was molded. But from this
From clay sprang the fire that purifies everything: genius.

* * *

Those who don't believe in genius, those who don't know what it is, should look
Michelangelo. Never was there a man so powerful.
It seemed that this genius was not of the same nature as him: conquering
was possessed and held in servitude. He had no will of his own.
has no role in this and one could almost say that his spirit and
nor his heart. It was a wild rapture, a fearful life in such a body and
in souls that were weak to contain it.

He lived in a constant state of excitement. This excessive power, which almost tore him apart,
It brought suffering and forced him to act, pause
without a single hour of rest.

“I am exhausted from work like no one else,” he once wrote, “not
I think about nothing but working day and night."

This morbid compulsion to act not only caused
piled up tasks and accepted more orders than he could handle
was able to fulfill: it turned into a real rage. He wanted mountains
If he had to erect a monument, he wasted years on it.
in quarries by sorting its blocks so that they can be transported
build roads; he wanted to be everything: engineer, laborer, stonemason; everything
he wanted to do it himself, palaces, temples, just himself. It's real
It was the life of a galley slave. He didn't even take the time to eat and drink.
Let him sleep. This pitiful complaint is repeated over and over in his letters:

“I can barely eat… I don’t have time to eat… I’ve been struggling for twelve years
I am destroying my body, I am lacking in what is necessary… There is no
My dear, I am naked, I suffer from a thousand troubles... In misery and troubles
I live… I struggle with misery.”[7]

This poverty existed only in his imagination. Michelangelo was rich;
he became rich, very rich.[8] But what was the use of it?
He lived in poverty, chained to his work like a horse tied to a mill. No one
could understand why he was so worried. No one could understand that he was not
It was in his power not to torment himself that this was a necessity for him. Even
his father, who had many similar traits to him, also reproached him
regarding:

"Your brother told me that you live very frugally, even miserably: the
Thrift is a good thing, but poverty is bad: a sin that is not pleasing.
neither before God nor before men and will harm your body as well,
your soul too. While you're young, it still works out somehow, but when you're not
you will be the one, the diseases and disabilities that this evil and
They will come from a miserable life, and then they will all appear at once.
Avoid poverty, live moderately, be careful not to be the
"Beware of excessive work, except when necessary..."[9]

But no amount of advice ever helped. He never agreed to
to live in a more humane way. His diet was a little bread and wine. He hardly slept
a few hours. While he was in Bologna, with a bronze statue of Pope Julius II
occupied, he had only one bed for himself and his three assistants.[10] On that
He lay down, fully clothed and in boots. Once his feet swelled up so much that
that his boots had to be ripped open: as they were pulled off, his skin came off with them
went.

This terrible lifestyle caused him to constantly do what his father had warned him against.
He was ill. In his letters he described fourteen or fifteen serious illnesses.
traces of it can be identified.[11] He suffered from fever several times, which did not
He once threatened to kill her. She had trouble with her eyes, teeth, head,
with his heart.[12] He was tormented by nervous spasms, especially in his sleep; sleep was a torment
him. He grew old early. At forty-two he felt his health declining.
his life.[13] At the age of forty-eight, he writes that if one day
working, he must rest for four days.[14] He stubbornly opposed it
for all kinds of medical treatment.

His spirit felt even more strongly the strain of a life spent in frenetic work.
consequences, like his body. Pessimism has undermined him. It is an inherited disease
was. In his youth he could not calm his father, who - it seems -
He occasionally suffered from attacks of persecution mania.[15] However, it was more severe
weighed heavily on Michelangelo as on the one he cared for. Incessantly
his activity, the grinding effort from which he could never rest
himself, thrown there without protection, his soul trembling with suspicion, all
He distrusted his enemies, he distrusted his friends.
[16] He did not trust his relatives, his brothers, his adopted son; with that
he suspected them of impatiently awaiting his death.

Everything troubled him;[17] even his own people mocked his perpetual restlessness.
above.[18] He himself says that it is “gloom, or rather madness”
He lived in a state of despair.[19] In the midst of his suffering, he finally felt almost satisfied with his
in suffering, he found bitter joy in it:

  The worse it is, the more pleasant it is to me.[20]

All suffering became an object for him, even love,[21] good
also.[22]

  Sorrow is joy to me.[23]

No one was created less for joy and more for sorrow. Only the
He saw sorrow, he felt it only in the infinite universe. All the world
His pessimism is summed up in this sublime expression of despair.
in his unjust exclamation:

  A thousand pleasures are not worth a single pain![24]

* * *

“His digestive energy,” says Condivi, “almost completely excluded
from the whole of human society.

He was alone. – Hated: hated. Loved: not loved. Marveled
and they feared him. He eventually gained religious respect. He rules
above the century. Then he softens a little. He sees the people from above, these
They see him from below. But he never belongs to them. For him, he never has any
the peace that is the reward of even the humblest being: that his life
may she fall asleep in the love of her fellow man in a moment. Woman
He had no part in her love. In this bleak sky, Vittoria Colonna's friendship
Its cold and clear star shines alone for a while. All around is the night,
through which the burning meteors of his thoughts run: his desires and feverish dreams. Never
Beethoven did not know such a night. Because this night is Michelangelo in itself
Beethoven was sad because of the world's faults; because of nature
he was cheerful, he longed for joy. Michelangelo had the innermost
sadness that creates fear in people and that makes everyone
He instinctively flees. He has created a void around himself.

That was nothing. Being alone wasn't the worst part. The
The worst thing was that he was alone with himself and that he couldn't
to live with himself, that he was not master of himself, that he denied, attacked,
destroyed himself. His genius was combined with a spirit that betrayed him. The
It is customary to speak of fate, which was his enemy and prevented him from
to carry out even one of his great plans. The key to his misfortune,
which explains the whole tragedy of his life - and this least of all
noticed or dared to notice – his lack of will and his character
weakness.

He was vacillating in art, in politics, in all his actions and
in all his thoughts. He could not bring himself to do two jobs,
choose between two plans, two parties. This is proven by Pope Julius II
the facade of the Church of San Lorenzo, the tombs of the Medici
story. He started this and that and didn't finish it. He wanted to and
He didn't want to. As soon as he had settled on his choice, he immediately began to doubt
in it. At the end of his life he finished nothing: he hated everything. It is customary to
to say that his duties were forced upon him and that the blame is being placed on his masters
responsibility for his perpetually fluctuating plans. He forgets,
that his masters did not have the means to carry out the tasks
would be forced upon him if he had decided to reject them. But he did not
dared to do it.

He was weak. He was weak in every way, from virtue and timidity. Weak
conscience. He was tormented by a thousand doubts, which a more vigorous
nature would have rejected him. He considered it his duty, his responsibility
with his excessive perception of taking on such mediocre tasks,
which any supervisor would have done better instead.[25] No
he was able neither to fulfill his contracts nor to forget them.[26]

He was weak from intelligence and fear. The same man whom Julius II.
called "terrible" (terribile). According to Vasari, he was "clever"; and
the one who “feared everyone, even the popes,”[27] from everyone
He was afraid. He was weak against the princes. Yet who despised him more?
those who were weak against the princes, – “the princes
"His donkeys," as he called them.[28] - He wanted to escape from the popes
from before, yet he remained and obeyed.[29] He tolerated the insulting letters of his masters
and he answered them humbly.[30] Yet sometimes he rebelled, proudly
spoke, but he always gave in. He defended himself until his death, but there was no
Clement VII, who – contrary to popular opinion –
of all the popes, he had the best disposition towards him, he knew
his weakness and his intention for it.[31]

In love he lost all his dignity. He humbled himself to such a fool
before, such as Febo di Poggio.[32] With Tommaso de' Cavalieri, who
He was a lovable but mediocre young man, treated like some kind of
"with a mighty spirit".[33]

Love at least makes such weaknesses palpable. But these are already
they are just sadly painful, – we dare not say that
are shameful, – when they arise from fear. Sudden panic attacks
Then, driven by fear, from one end of Italy to the other,
flees. He flees Florence in 1494, when a vision terrified him.
He also fled Florence in 1529 when the city was besieged,
entrusted to his protection. He flees all the way to Venice and almost dies.
He does not run away to France. Later he is ashamed of this stumble: he also
brings, returns to the besieged city and fulfills its duties there until the end of the siege
But how weak and trembling after the capture of Florence, when the
Proscriptions reign there! He even courts Valori, the proscription
his steward, who had just caused his friend, the nobleman Battista della
Palla's death. Unfortunately, he goes so far as to deny his friends, the
Florentine exiles.[34]

He is afraid. He is mortally ashamed of his fear. He despises himself. For himself
It makes him sick with disgust. He wants to die. They think he will
to die.[35]

But it cannot die. It has a crazy vitality that renews itself every day.
born to suffer more. If only he could have torn himself away,
so that he may not act! But he is not allowed to do this. There can be no action
without. He acts. He must act. Does he really act? Rather
victim of action, his playthings are his frenzied and contradictory passions
whirlwind, like one of Dante's damned.

How much he must have suffered!

  Oh, woe to me! I'll weigh it all up anyway
  My days have passed and I cannot find them.
  Just one, what would have been mine![36]

He prayed to God in despair:

  … Oh God! My God!
  I am not a master, who can master me?[37]

He longed for death because he saw in it the end of this maddening slavery.
end. With what envy he speaks of those who have died!

  – – – – – – – – – –
  I am no longer worried about life changing, –
  I'm so jealous of you while I'm writing this...
  A series of hours would mean nothing to you,
  Case and necessity no longer compel...[38]

To die! To live no more! To be no more! To be free from things
From the tyranny of the self! To escape from the hallucination of one's own self!

  Help me, I will never come back to myself![39]

* * *

I can almost hear this tragic cry erupting from that painful
from the mouth of a face whose restless eyes still gaze upon us today
In the Capitoline Museum.[40]

He was of medium height, broad-shouldered, with a strong, muscular build. His body
The work had made him deformed; he walked with his head held high, his back hunched, his
This is how the portrait painted by Francisco d'Ollanda presents it;
standing, from the side, in black clothing; a Roman cloak covers her shoulders, on her head
cloth cap and over it a large black felt hat, pushed deep into the head.[41]
He had a round head, a square forehead, bulging above his eyes,
His face was furrowed with wrinkles. His hair was black, sparse, shaggy, and curly. His eyes
They were small,[42] sad and strong-looking, of varying horn color,
with yellowish and bluish spots. A broad, straight nose, with a
It bulged, Torrigiani's fist broke it.[43] From the tip of his nose to his mouth
deep wrinkles ran down to the corners of his eyes. His mouth was delicately cut; his lower lip
He stood slightly forward. His thin face with prominent cheekbones was thin on the sides,
and he had a faun-like, branched, sparse beard, four or five inches long
around.

An expression of sadness and uncertainty dominates his entire face. Tasso
a worried, doubt-ridden face typical of his time. Moving
His eyes arouse pity, they beg.

* * *

Let's not feel sorry for him. Let's give him the love he deserves all his life.
all his life and which he had not had a part in. The greatest
He experienced misfortunes that can befall a person. In slavery
He saw his homeland. He saw the country that had been at the mercy of barbarians for centuries.
Italy. He saw freedom die. He saw them disappear – one of
one after the other – those he loved. He saw them fall asleep – one of them
one after another – all the brilliance of art.

He was left alone, the last, in the descending night. And when his death
He looked back on the threshold, unable to even tell himself for comfort that
He did everything he had to do, everything he could have done. He was lost.
looked at his life. In vain it was joyless. In vain he sacrificed art
his idol.[44]

The superhuman work to which he condemned himself lasted ninety years of his life.
for a year, without a single day of rest, without a single day of real life, even
nor did it serve to carry out any of his great plans. Great
Among his works, among those that were most dear to his heart, there is only one
none were finished, not a single one. The irony of fate was that
so that this sculptor[45] can only finish with his paintings, which
he painted against his will. Among his great works, which alternately
They aroused in him a proud hope and bitterness, partly while he was still alive.
were destroyed, such as the cartoon of the _Battle of Pisa_ and the bronze statue of Julius II,
others – the tomb of Julius II, the Medici chapel – are sadly
they were stranded: the distortions of his thought.

Ghiberti, the sculptor, in his _Memoirs_ tells of a poor German goldsmith
history of a man who was in the service of the Duke of Anjou. "He was equal
with the ancient sculptors of Greece" and at the end of his life he saw them being destroyed
the work to which he had dedicated his life. – “Then he saw,
that all his efforts were in vain and he fell to his knees and cried out
up: O Lord, Prince of heaven and earth, Creator of all things, grant that
May I never again stray and follow others besides you; have mercy on me.
on me! And without delay he gave all he had to the poor, went into a hermitage
He marched and died there..."

Like the poor goldsmith, Michelangelo, at the end of his life, bitterly
He looked back on his life lived in vain, his efforts in vain, his unfinished,
He died, his works unfinished.

Then he resigned. The pride of the Renaissance, the free man who rules over everything
The pride of his soul was broken in him.

  And the soul turns only to one Love:
  Who from the cross extends his arms![46]

_Ode to Joy:_ this fertile cry did not pass his lips. Last
Until his last breath, there was nothing but an Ode to Pain, the liberating
To death. Completely defeated.

* * *

Such was one of the conquerors of this world. We who have seen the works of his genius
enjoy it, in the same way we enjoy the conquests of our ancestors: we no longer think
to the blood that was shed.

  Don't think about it.
  How much blood costs.[47]

I wanted to expose this blood before everyone's eyes and above our heads.
to wave the red banner of heroes.




PART ONE The Struggle


I. THE POWER

_Davide cholla fromba e io choll' face,_

_Michelagniolo_.[48]

He was born in Caprese, Casentino, on March 6, 1475. “Fine
airy,[49] a barren landscape, with its rocks and beech forests, the bony
It rises above the ridge of the Apennines. Not far from here, on Monte Alvernia,
Francis of Assisi saw the appearance of the Crucified.

Michelangelo's father[50] was the podesta of Caprese and Chiusi. Fierce,
a restless, “God-fearing” man. Michelangelo was six years old when his mother[51] died.
[52] There were five brothers: Lionardo, Michelagniolo, Buonarroto,
Giovan Simone and Sigismondo.[53]

She was given to the wife of a stonemason from Settignano as a nurse. Later,
jokingly attributed his vocation as a sculptor to this milk. To school
was sent there; however, he only engaged in drawing. "Therefore his father and
His father's brothers looked down on him and often treated him cruelly.
they beat him because they hated the art of painting and considered it a disgrace,
to have an artist in their house."[54] Thus, already in his early childhood
he became acquainted with the harshness of life and the desolation of the spirit.

His stubbornness overcame his father's. At the age of thirteen, as a student
Domenico Ghirlandajo, the greatest and healthiest Florentine, entered
painter's workshop. His first works were so successful that, according to tradition,
According to the story, the master became jealous of the disciple.[55] After a year had passed
they separated from each other.

He hated painting. He sought a more heroic art. In that
He transferred to the sculpture school run by Lorenzo de' Medici at San
in the gardens of Marco.[56] The lord took an interest in him: he gave him in his palace
for him a place to stay and a place at his sons' table. The child in the Italian Renaissance
entered into his heart, into the collection of ancient memories, the great Platonists,
into the poetic and scholarly atmosphere of Marsilio Ficino, Benivieni, and Angelo Poliziano.
Intoxicated by their spirit; to live in the world of antiquity, his soul
made him a classic: he became a Greek sculptor. Poliziano "loved him very much", the
Under his leadership he sculpted the _Fight of the Centaurs and Lapiths_.[57]

This proud relief, in which impassive strength and beauty reign,
reflects the young athlete's spirit and the wild pursuits he pursued with his raw companions
his games.

He went to the Carmine church to draw Masaccio's paintings,
With Lorenzo di Credi, Bugiardini, Granacci and Torrigiano dei
Along with Torrigiani. He did not spare his companions, who were less
were as skillful as he. One day he ran into the vain Torrigiani.
Torrigiani smashed his face with a punch. He even boasted afterwards
with him: "I clenched my fist," Benvenuto said to Cellini, "and
I punched him in the nose with such force that I felt his bones shatter.
and cartilage, like some kind of dough. Thus I branded him for the rest of his life.”[58]

* * *

Paganism did not extinguish Michelangelo's Christian faith. The two
A hostile world vied for his soul.

In 1490, Savonarola, a monk, began his fiery sermon on the Apparitions.
his speeches. He was thirty-seven years old. Michelangelo was fifteen. He saw the little
a tall, thin preacher consumed by the spirit of God. His face froze.
in terror at the terrible voice that came from the pulpit of the Duomo
He flashed the bloody sword of God towards the Pope and over Italy with lightning.
Florence was trembling. People were running in the streets, crying.
and shouting like fools. The richest citizens, the Ruccellai,
From the Salviati, Albizzi, Strozzi families, they were ordained into monastic orders
to enter. Even the scientists, the philosophers, Pico della Mirandola,
Poliziano descended from the heights of their intellect.[59] Michelangelo's eldest
his brother, Lionardo, became a Dominican friar.[60]
